Required content of Working Paper CLIO-INFRA

Please include the following elements into any working paper entered
into the CLIO-INFRA system:

1. Title

	Ratio of girls to boys in average years of schooling by country and
decade

2. Author(s)

	Sarah Carmichael, Selin Dilli and Auke Rijpma, Utrecht University

3. Production date

	25 August 2014

4. Version

	1

5. Variable group(s)

	Gender equality

6. Variable(s)

Educational Attainment

7. Unit of analysis

	Country

8. Keywords (5)

	Gender equality, education

9. Abstract (200 words)

	Barro and Lee (2010) provide data on educational attainment
disaggregated by age groups over 15 and by sex. The information on
average years of education has been used to evaluate the progress that
has been made in the second half of the 20th century in closing the
gender gap regarding education. Their data and detailed information
regarding their dataset can be accessed at: http://www.barrolee.com/

10. Time period

	1950–2009, 5 year intervals

11. Geographical coverage

	Worldwide, selected countries. Original dataset includes data for 146
countries 

12. Methodologies used for data collection and processing

	See http://www.barrolee.

13. Data quality

	Data on school attainment comes from census/survey figures, which
report the distribution of education in the population over age 15 by
sex. Detailed information on the data quality can be found at:
http://www.barrolee.

 

14. Date of collection

	See references

15. Data collectors

	Robert Barro and Jong-Wha Lee

16. Sources

	

Barro, Robert and Jong-Wha Lee, April 2010, "A New Data Set of
Educational Attainment in the World, 1950-2010." Journal of Development
Economics, vol 104, pp.184-198

17. Text

To capture the gender disparities in socio-economic resources, a ratio
of female to male average years of education has been taken. Barro and
Lee (2010) collected the data on school enrollments comes from
census/survey data that has been provided by sources such as UNESCO,
Eurostat and national statistical archives. The data source provides
information on the distribution of educational attainment in the
population over age 25 by sex and by 5-year age group in seven
categories: no formal education, incomplete primary, complete primary,
lower secondary, upper secondary, incomplete tertiary and complete
tertiary education. This information has been supplemented by
information from mainly UNESCO, Statistical yearbooks to gather
information on the duration of primary, and two levels of secondary
education. The duration is the typical duration of primary and the two
levels.  For higher education, the authors assumed duration of four
years for all countries between 1950 and 2009. If a person entered to
the tertiary school but did not complete it, they assigned two years of
education to this person. These information on the distribution of
educational attainment among population and the duration of the
completion of educational attainment levels, are then used to construct
the average years of education achieved by the average person (Barro and
Lee 2010). 

