Required content of Working Paper CLIO-INFRA

Please include the following elements into any working paper entered into the CLIO-INFRA system:

1. Title
	Total Iron Ore Mine production per decade and country
2. Author(s)
	Kees Klein Goldewijk & Jonathan Fink-Jensen, Utrecht University
3. Production date
	2014-11-12.
4. Version
	1
5. Variable group(s)
	Environmental sustainability
6. Variable(s)
	Total Iron Ore Mine production, in million metric tons
7. Unit of analysis
	Country
8. Keywords (5)
	Iron, Ore, Mine production, Fe
9. Abstract (200 words) Taken from Wikipedia:

Iron is the world's most commonly used metal - steel, of which iron ore is the key ingredient, representing almost 95% of all metal used per year. It is used primarily in structural engineering applications and in maritime purposes, automobiles, and general industrial applications (machinery).

Prior to the industrial revolution, most iron was obtained from widely available goethite or bog ore. Prehistoric societies used laterite as a source of iron ore. Historically, much of the iron ore utilized by industrialized societies has been mined from predominantly hematite deposits with grades of around 70% Fe. These deposits are commonly referred to as "direct shipping ores" or "natural ores". Increasing iron ore demand, coupled with the depletion of high-grade hematite ores in the United States, after World War II led to development of lower-grade iron ore sources, principally the utilization of magnetite and taconite. 

At present, mining iron ore is a high volume low margin business, as the value of iron is significantly lower than base metals. It is highly capital intensive, and requires significant investment in infrastructure such as rail in order to transport the ore from the mine to a freight ship. For these reasons, iron ore production is concentrated in the hands of a few major players.

10. Time period
	1820 -2012
11. Geographical coverage
	Worldwide
12. Methodologies used for data collection and processing
	Historical mining statistics 
13. Data quality
	Good.
14. Date of collection
	See references
15. Data collectors
	BGS, Mitchell, Schmitz, USGS.
16. Sources
* BGS, British Geological Survey. https://www.bgs.ac.uk/
* Mitchell, B.R., International Historical Statistics  -  Africa, Asia & Oceania 1750-1993 (London, 1998).
* Mitchell, B.R., International Historical Statistics  -  Europe (London, 1998).
* Mitchell, B.R., International Historical Statistics  -  The Americas 1750-1993 (London, 1998).
* Schmitz, Christopher J., World Non-Ferrous Metal Production and Prices, 1700-1976 (London, 1979).



