Working Paper CLIO-INFRA: Competitiveness of Participation
1. Title
	-  Competitiveness of Participation (PARCOMP)
2. Author(s)
	- Marhsall, M.G., Gurr, T.R., Jaggers, K.
3. Production date
	- 14.04.2014
4. Version
	- 1st version.
5. Variable group(s)
	- Institutions
6. Variable(s)
	-  Regulation of Participation, 1 - Unregulated (Political participation is fluid; there are no enduring national political organizations and no systematic regime controls on political activity), 2 -Multiple Identity (There are relatively stable and enduring political groups which compete
for political influence at the national level - parties, regional groups, or ethnic groups, not
necessarily elected - but there are few, recognized overlapping (common) interests), 3 - Sectarian (Political demands are characterized by incompatible interests and intransigent posturing among multiple identity groups and oscillate more or less regularly between intense factionalism and government favoritism), 4 - Restricted: Some organized political participation is permitted without intense factionalism but significant groups, issues, and/or types of conventional participation are
regularly excluded from the political process, 5 - Regulated: Relatively stable and enduring political groups regularly compete for political influence and positions with little use of coercion
Other codes: -66  -  interruption period (e.g. occupation by foreign forces), -77  -  interregnum period (collapse of central authority), -88  - transition period (a period within new institutions, policies are introduced)
7. Unit of analysis
	- dimensionless, multi-nominal scale
8. Keywords (5)
	- democracy, politics, institutions, polityIV
9. Abstract (200 words)
- A component of the polityIV measure. 
10. Time period
	- 1800-2010
11. Geographical coverage
	- 164 countries
12. Methodologies used for data collection and processing
- Secondary literature and expert judgement.
13. Data quality
		iii. Estimates
		iv. Conjectures		
14. Period of collection
	n.a.
15. Data collectors
              n.a.
16. Sources
As specified in 
http://www.systemicpeace.org/inscr/p4manualv2012.pdf

17. Text
For further information or links to the original data please visit the institutions hub of the CLIO-INFRA: http://www.cgeh.nl/institutions-hub or visit the polityIV project website at http://www.systemicpeace.org/inscr/inscr.htm

