Required content of Working Paper CLIO-INFRA

Please include the following elements into any working paper entered
into the CLIO-INFRA system:

1. Title

 Historical Gender Equality Index

2. Author(s)

	Sarah Carmichael, Selin Dilli and Auke Rijpma, Utrecht University

3. Production date

	30 August 2014

4. Version

	1

5. Variable group(s)

	Gender equality

6. Variable(s)

composite Historical Gender Equality Index combining data on life
expectancy, sex ratio, education, labor force participation, marriage
ages, parliament seats

7. Unit of analysis

	Country

8. Keywords (5)

	Gender equality, composite index, Historical Gender Equality Index

9. Abstract (200 words)

	The composite index aims to evaluate countries’ performances
regarding the progress they made in closing the gender gap in the fields
of health, socio-economic resources, politics and household since 1950. 

	 

10. Time period

	1950–2003

11. Geographical coverage

	Regional averages and 25 Clio-infra countries.

12. Methodologies used for data collection and processing

	Decadal averages for each Clio-infra region and country were taken.

13. Data quality

	The composite index is based on various data sources. A discussion of
data sources of each indicator is included in Clio-infra website and in
Carmichael et al. (2014). The data coverage for each gender equality
indicator becomes substantially better after 1950 and is mostly based on
scholarly research or statistical agencies.

14. Date of collection

	2013

15. Data collectors

Sarah Carmichael, Selin Dilli, and Auke Rijpma

16. Sources

Dilli, S., A. Rijpma and S. Carmichael (2014), “Gender Equality in a
Historical Perspective: Introducing the Historical Gender Equality
Index”, CGEH Working Paper Series No.61, http://www.cgeh.nl/working-
paper-series/.	

 See also other working papers on gender equality indicators in
Clio-infra website.

17. Text

The HGI is constructed by following Hausmann et al. (2012) who created
the Global Gender Gap index (GGG). The composite index includes the
gender differences in four dimensions, health, socio-economic resources,
household and politics. Health is measured by life expectancy and sex
ratios whereas socio-economic resources are captured by average years of
education and labour force participation. The gender disparities in the
household are captured by the marriage ages and the data on distribution
of parliamentary seats between men and women is used as an indication of
gender disparities in the politics. Each of these variables is presented
in female/male ratio. Before creating the composite index, values above
1 were truncated to be 1 except for sex ratio where the equality
benchmark is set to be 0.944. For health and socio-economic resources,
we have two indicators capturing these dimensions. We have given a
weight to each of these indicators, so that the variable with higher
standard deviation would not get a higher weight in the sub-index. Thus
we normalize the variables in each sub-index by first determining what a
1% point change would translate into in the standard deviations
(calculated by dividing .01 by the standard deviation of each variable),
then determining the weight to each variable. As a final step, the total
of the four sub-indexes was taken, divided by four and multiplied by 100
for the ease of interpretation. A higher score in our index thus
highlights less gender equality in favour of women. A more detailed
discussion of the composite index is provided in Dilli et al. (2014)

References:

Hausmann, Ricardo, Laura D. Tyson, and Saadia Zahidi. 2012. “The
Global Gender Gap Report”. World Economic Forum.   HYPERLINK
"http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GenderGap_Report_2012.pdf" 
http://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_GenderGap_Report_2012.pdf 

Carmichael, S., S. Dilli and A. Rijpma (2014), “Gender Inequality in a
Long Term Perspective”, in J.L. Van Zanden, M. Mira d’Ercole, A.
Rijpma, C. Smith and M. Timmer, eds., in Global Well-being and
Development: A Long-term Perspective Since 1820, OECD, Paris.

Dilli, S., A. Rijpma and S. Carmichael (2014), “Gender Equality in a
Historical Perspective: Introducing 	the Historical Gender Equality
Index”, CGEH Working Paper Series No.61, 	http://www.cgeh.nl/working-
paper-series/.

